## Pofessional Self Assessment
I have drafted this self assessment as a means to summarize my formal education along with my experiece here at SNHU as I progressed through the Computer Science program.  I would also like to take this opportunity to reflect on a few artifacts that I have chosen to include here in my ePortfolio that I worked on during my college career. 

## My Educational Background
After graduating high school I decided to join the US Navy.  I knew I wanted to work with computers and electronics so I entered into the Advanced Electronics and Computer Field.  I spent the first two years of my Naval career learning electrical theory and troubleshooting various types of electrical and electronic systems as well as computer systems and programming computers.  After separating from the Navy I knew I wanted to further my education and entered into Southern New Hampshire's Bachelor's of Computer Science program.  

## Reflection here at SNHU
I've enjoyed my time as a student at SNHU and learnt so many things along the way.  Throughout the program I've began coding in various languages such as Java, C++, Python, and SQL, wrote code to perform quick and accurate searches of large databases, as well as created and managed databases. I've also gained experience in 3D programming in OpenGL and as a gamer, this was an exciting course for me.  I also had to opportunity to learn about things that I never knew I would need to know about in a computer science program such as statistics, discrete math, calculus, and Physics.  Once I got into these classes it became clear why they were important to the computer science field and I knew I would be using them throughout the rest of my professional career.  Another interesting aspect of this program was learning about working together in a team envrionment.  I learnt about the Agile methodology and the necessary collaborations and face-to-face interractions between team members throughout the software development lifecycle. I also learnt about being part of a SCRUM team, holding daily meetings with other team members to discuss progress as well as potential problems with the project.  I also got the play the role of a Project Manager ensuring all aspects of the project were satisfied including deilverables, adhearing to agreed upon timelines, staying within budget, and making sure the overall project is a success.  

 communicating to stakeholders, data structures and algorithms, software engineering and database,
and security. Note: This should function as an overall introduction to your skills and you will become more specific relative to the included
artifacts in the next section.

## Final Project Portfolio
The culmination of my Computer Science program is this ePortfolio which highlights on the skills and abilities in the categories of Software Design and Engineering, Algorithms and Data Structures, and Databases.  Looking back, there have been a few courses that stood out to me that demonstrate my knowledge and experience in these categories and I wanted to share my accomplishments with you.  The first of those courses was CS-350 Emerging Sys Architecture & Technology in which I wrote code in Python to program a Raspberry Pi to perform differnt functions based on what sensors and devices were attached with it.  The second course that stood out to me was CS-260 Data Structures and Algorithms.  In this course I wrote C++ code to perform binary searches on large databases.  I also wrote algorithms to access data structures.  Without these data structures programs would be huge, and hard to maintain, and performing coding debugs would be daunting.  Lastly, in DAD-220 Introduction to Structured Database Environments I gained experience with MySQL and writing code to create and manage web databases as well as data warehousing.  Below you will find a narrative of each of the artifacts that I've included, as well as an informal code review and the source code to go along with it.  

## Software Design and Engineering Narrative
The Raspberry Pi is a very versatile and powerful computer in a very small and relatively cheap package.  It’s uses are endless and only limited by the creativity of your own mind.  The source code for the project allows the Raspberry Pi to monitor temperature and humidity, and displays that information to an LCD screen while simultaneously updating a JSON database file with the recorded data to be used for long term analysis.  By learning how the Raspberry Pi operates and interacts with Python software, I’m able to design custom applications to meet the specifications of potential clients and can cater my software to match that of the hardware that is connected to the Raspberry Pi.  I created this software in a prior semester in college to highlight just some of the capabilities of the Pi as well as my capabilities and flexibility as a programmer to adapt my code to different functions of the Raspberry Pi.
Reflecting back on what my software looks and performs like now, vs how it looked when I initially created it, I feel like it is much more organized, and easier to read and understand.  Documentation of the code has also been improved and standardized throughout so that others will be able to understand what I’m doing and why I’m doing it.  I was able to successfully output my data organized by columns instead of on a single line like it was initially.
When I look back at the enhancement process of my code, I feel like it was a great learning experience for me.  I was able to identify problem areas in the documentation and correct them.  The process has shown how standardized, well written code can make my work stand out amongst my peers and make me a valuable asset to potential employers.  I also learnt from my mistakes.  I initially had a hard time figuring out what was causing my output file to be outputted in a single row, but a correction in code spacing and now my output file is now organized into columns and easy to read.  Mistakes will be made but how you adapt and overcome these mistakes shows who you are as a professional.

## [Informal code review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/8crzekq6gkv560a/Category%201.mov?dl=0)
## [Software Design and Engineering Source Code](https://github.com/Roth2020/Roth2020.github.io/blob/main/Software%20Design%20and%20Engineering.zip)

## Algorithms and Data Structures Narrative
With so many connected devices in the world today the practice of collecting data, sorting data, storing data, and analyzing it is only going to get more and more complex as time goes on.  Databases are going to get larger, and searches will need to be performed in the most efficient way possible to preserve computer resources and minimize the amount of time spent performing these searches.  Businesses of all sorts have access to large databases to help them target select audiences to increase sales, or perhaps to help their company run smoother by the use of electronic records databases but if these companies don’t have the means to manipulate and search through this data then it’s not going to be of any value to them.  My selected artifact of Binary Searches does a good job at showcasing these skills and shows how it can be of use to potential clients.  This project loads bids from an Excel spreadsheet and then allows the user to perform searches and manipulate the database by removing files from the spreadsheet.  It does this quickly and accurately to reduce the strain on the computer running the search.
I have selected this artifact to be included in my ePortfolio because it showcases a multitude of coding skills as well as gives an example of how well binary searches can help a company sort through complex data quickly and efficiently compared to that of linear searches.  I also feel that the code can be easily followed and that I have done a good job at documenting the code along the way.  I’ve also enhanced by skills with the use of if-else statements, the conversion of strings to doubles, and trees and sub-trees.  My code demonstrates editing trees by adding and subtracting items from it as well as performing general searches of the tree.
When I look over the course objectives, I feel like I’ve done a good job at meeting them thus far.  I’ve enhanced my code my cleaning it up and removing unwanted comments, standardized my documentation of the code, and it performs as intended by searching a large database and outputting results not only in a timely manner but also accurately.  After all, what good is a search if your results aren’t correct.  
Reflecting back on the enhancement of this artifact it was another great learning experience for me.  I was able to make some additional comments to provide better documentation of my code as well as correcting the search error that I initially had.  The search now performs as intended.  It’s also been a while since I’ve written binary search code so getting a chance to look it over again helped me keep it fresh in my mind.  As with everything the more you practice the better you will be, and I have no doubt my next search coding will be even better!

## [Informal Code Review of Algorithms and Data Structures](https://www.dropbox.com/home?preview=Category+2.mov)
## [Algorithms and Data Structures](https://github.com/Roth2020/Roth2020.github.io/blob/main/BinarySearchTree.cpp)

## Databases Narrative
With the amount of information being collected from connected devices, databases are the key to managing this information, and one of the most popular databases in use today is MySQL.  MySQL has been around since 1994 and is still going strong today which is why for my third category of Databases, I have decided to include a project I did in MySQL in my ePortfolio.  
The project is a list of commands that I utilized create a database called QuantigrationUpdates.  In this database there are multiple tables with attributes and once the dataset is imported in information can be manipulated as desired.  I performed basic queries to organize and analyze targeted data as well as update the database with additional records.  My original submitted work I had problems being able to insert new records into the database, but I have since corrected that mistake and I’m able to insert records as needed.  This demonstrates my ability to learn from mistakes and make corrections to ensure a successful and accurate result.  I’ve also standardized my documentation of the code.  I initially had comments annotated different ways along with some being capitalized and others in lower case.  
Reflecting back to the course objectives I feel that I’ve done a good job at meeting them because not only have I made enhancements to the functionality of the code, but I’ve also learnt a great deal more since my original submission.  I have the ability to not only perform a broad search of data, but I now know how to search for a specific group of data in a large dataset.  In this particular dataset I not only can search customers from a specific state, but I can also narrow their location down to their city.  This becomes even more useful when trying to target a specific audience or location.  The challenges I faced on this project were less than those previously mentioned in the other two categories as I had a better understanding of SQL early on however using the Codio application took a few uses to really become efficient with it.  I feel confident that if a company came to me with a large dataset that they needed to pull from that I could output whatever information they are wanting out of it.

## [Informal Code Review of Databases](https://www.dropbox.com/home?preview=Category+3.mov)
## [Databases](https://github.com/Roth2020/Roth2020.github.io/blob/main/ProjectOne-Code.txt)


Thank you for taking the time to look over my ePortfolio and I look forward to speaking with you.
